Feature/biohackrxiv papers (#27)
neicnordic/sda-dashboard: biohackrxiv-paper-2022/paper-21/paper.md

GDPR legislation and this requires special care to be taken when using and
re-using this data for research. To enable this in a compliant way the
Federated EGA was established in 2022 [@FEGA]. The Federated EGA is
built on top of the already existing European Genome/Phenome Arcive (EGA)
[@EGA]. The nordic countries, Norway, Finland and Sweden together with Spain
and Germany represent the first federated partners.

In the nordics we have collaborated around our own implementation for our
federated EGA nodes, we have done this under the umbrella of the Nordic
e-Infrastructure Collaboration (NeIC)[https://neic.no/] [@NEIC] where we've had
three projects over the last 7 years, [Tryggve1](https://neic.no/tryggve1/)
[@Tryggve1], [Tryggve2](https://neic.no/tryggve2/) [@Tryggve2] and now
[Heilsa](https://neic.no/heilsa) [@Heilsa].

As we in the nordics now move into production there is a need for both System
Administrators and Helpdesk staff to be able to control and inspect the system.
We need to answer questions related to operations, identify errors in order to
better manage the services and infrastructure. To standardize this workflow and

> make the system easier to use we decided to build an MVP for such an “Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make the system easier to use we decided to build a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) for such an “Operator
```

Dashboard” during the Elixir Biohackathon 2022.

# Results

> We used [grafana](https://grafana.com) to create a Minimal Viable Product (MVP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used [grafana](https://grafana.com) to create a MVP
```

> of a dashboard to view the current state of the systema and to give some simple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a dashboard to view the current state of the system and to give some simple
```

> interaction points with system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
points of interacting with it.
```

![An overview of the state of the system. This can be filtered by submitters, file status and also assigned dataset. It shows the status of every file in the system and can also show some overall statistics of the system. \label{fig1}](./paper-overview.png)

There are two main views into the system. The first one is an overview over all
files and what state they are in, whether they have been moved from the inbox,
if they've been backed up and if they have gotten the EGA identifiers from
[Central EGA](https://ega-archive.org), see Figure \ref{fig1}. It is possible
from this view to also click on a file to go to the second view with
information about all events that has happened to that specific file, to aid
the helpdesk staff in the task of supporting the submitting researcher, see
Figure \ref{fig2}.

![Detailed event log for a file. The top panel shows the current state of a file while the bottom panel contains a log of every event the file has gone through. \label{fig2}](./paper-file-detail.png)

We also made a proof-of-concept of controlling the system through the
dashboard. It's possible to click on a "Retry" link and then the state of a

> file changes from whatever it is already in to "Uploaded" instead, we didn't
> have enough time to also restart the ingestion pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file changes from whatever it is already in to "Uploaded" instead. We didn't
have enough time to also implement the restarting of the ingestion pipeline itself.
```

# Future Work

The dashboard needs to be integrated into the production system so we can try
it out with actual data. The interaction with the system is in a pre-alpha
demonstrator state and will have to be removed before deploying to production.
There's also an open question whether it's a good idea to preload the

> dashboards in the way that is currently done in the docker-compose or if that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dashboards in the way that is currently done in the docker-compose file or if that
```

makes editing of the dashboards too complicated.

> We also aim to test this dashboard on our own internal helpdesk staff to see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also aim to have this dashboard tested by our own internal helpdesk staff to check
```

whether our assumptions about what they want to see holds true.

> It was also quite useful for the development team working with the code-base

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project was also quite useful for the development team working with the code-base
```
